Clarification on parcels (#207)
CanopyTax/single-spa.js.org: website/versioned_docs/version-5.x/module-types.md

---
id: module-types
title: single-spa conceptual module types
sidebar_label: Conceptual Module Types
---

> # Concept: single-spa modules

Author: I'm torn on using the term `module` I worry that it's overloaded but I didn't like `types` either for the same reason, if anyone has a suggestion on a better verb please let me know.

Reviewer: I agree, module doesn't seem right for our docs. I think it's be best to stay consistent with our current "single-spa applications", or lean into the "microfrontend" or "browser microservice" terminology.

Reviewer 2: Yeah we've already introduced these concepts in other places with other terminology, where we call it "types of microfrontends". The term "single-spa modules" isn't my favorite.

Honestly I wonder if this whole new page would be better off just as additional sections to microfrontends-concept.md? It's only 50 lines of documentation, which isn't a ton.

> Single-spa has [different categories](./microfrontends-concept#types-of-microfrontends) of microfrontends. It is up to you where and how you use each of them. However, the single-spa core team has [recommendations](./recommended-setup/#applications-versus-parcels-versus-utility-modules).

Reviewer 2: [The docusaurus docs](https://v2.docusaurus.io/docs/versioning/#linking-files) suggest putting in `.md` for relative links, but the extension is not here. Have you verified whether omitting the `.md` still works?

Author: Yeah it does work. I added the `.md` anyways though

> Single-spa has [different categories](/docs/microfrontends-concept#types-of-microfrontends) of microfrontends. It is up to you where and how you use each of them. However, the single-spa core team has [recommendations](/docs/recommended-setup/#applications-versus-parcels-versus-utility-modules).

Reviewer 2: Oh one thing I just remembered - we should start using relative links for linking between files. This is important for versioning - we want to always stay within the same version of the single-spa docs when linking. See related https://github.com/single-spa/single-spa.js.org/issues/178 and https://v2.docusaurus.io/docs/versioning/#linking-files

```suggestion
Single-spa has [different categories](/docs/microfrontends-concept#types-of-microfrontends) of microfrontends. It is up to you where and how you use each of them. However, the single-spa core team has [recommendations](./recommended-setup.md#applications-versus-parcels-versus-utility-modules).
```

Please modify all links in this page accordingly

Here is how each single-spa microfrontend works conceptually. This information should help you understand our [recommendations](/docs/recommended-setup/#applications-versus-parcels-versus-utility-modules).

> | application                       | parcel                               | utility                              |

Reviewer 2: I think this table would make more sense if there were a column that explained what each row was. For example, the first row could be called "routing".

```suggestion
| Topic                | application                       | parcel                               | utility                              |
```

| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------ |

> | has multiple routes               | no routes                            | no route                             |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| has multiple routes               | no routes                            | no routes                            |
```

> | declarative API                   | impertive API                        | not registered/mounted by single-spa |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| declarative API                   | imperative API                        | not registered/mounted by single-spa |
```

| renders UI                        | renders UI                           | no UI                                |

> | single-spa managed lifecylces     | custom managed lifecycles            | no DOM elements                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| single-spa managed lifecycles     | custom managed lifecycles            | no DOM elements                      |
```

One thing - it is not strictly true that utility modules do not deal with dom elements. A styleguide, for example, exposes UI components that create DOM elements. It sounds like we might be talking about lifecycles or "mount points" in this table row, so the languaging for utility modules could be "no lifecycle methods"

> | Core building block               | only needed with multiple frameworks | useful to share business logic       |

Reviewer 2: Honestly I don't like the term business logic much, because I find it to be a buzz term / catch-all that means whatever anyone wants it to mean. Also, I think utility modules can do a lot more than just business logic.

> | lifecycles           | single-spa managed lifecylces     | custom managed lifecycles            | no lifecycles                        |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| lifecycles           | single-spa managed lifecycles     | custom managed lifecycles            | no lifecycles                        |
```

> Each single-spa module is in reality an in browser javascript module see [here](/docs/recommended-setup#in-browser-versus-build-time-modules) for more information. Each type/module fits into the overall microfrontend approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each microfrontend is an in-browser javascript module ([explanation](/docs/recommended-setup#in-browser-versus-build-time-modules)).
```

## Applications

### Applications are declarative

> Applications use a declarative api. Your single-spa config (also sometimes called root config) defines applications ahead of time, defines the condition at which they are active, but doesn't mount the application directly.

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that `registerApplication` is the declarative API?

```suggestion
Applications use a declarative api called `registerApplication`. Your single-spa config (also sometimes called root config) defines applications ahead of time, defines the condition at which they are active, but doesn't mount the application directly.
```

### Applications have managed lifecycles
single-spa manages registered applications and is in charge of all of their lifecycles. This prevents you from writing a bunch of logic about when applications should mount and unmount; single-spa takes care of that for you.
All single spa needs to make this work automatically is for an activity function that describes when your application should be active.

## Parcels

> ### Parcels are imperitive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Parcels are imperative
```

Parcels exist in many ways as an escape hatch from the normal declarative flow. They exist primarily to allow you to reuse UI across applications when those applications are written in multiple frameworks.

### You manage the lifecycles of Parcels
When you call `mountParcel` or `mountRootParcel` [(see api)](/docs/parcels-api) the parcel is mounted immediately and returns the parcel object. You need to call the `unmount` method on the parcel manually when the component that calls `mountParcel` unmounts.

> ### Parcels are best suited for sharing components between frameworks

Reviewer: "components" seems a bit too overloaded too. What do you think of

> best suited for sharing UI between frameworks.

Alternative terms I think should be considered are "widgets" or "UI components".

Reviewer 2: I think that the term component works fine here. Parcels really are framework agnostic components.

> ### Parcels are best suited for sharing UI between frameworks

Reviewer 2: I think some people use parcels because they don't know what the alternative is. Should we perhaps have another subsection called "Alternatives to parcels" - maybe linking to the react styleguide that exports react components directly into other applications.

Author: That's a good idea. I don't have an example of that yet (but will soon) I created [an issue](https://github.com/single-spa/single-spa.js.org/issues/208) for it so I don't forget and put that in another MR

Because single-spa can mount a parcel anywhere, this gives you a way to share components across frameworks. It should not be used if the shared component is being used in another application of the same framework.
For example: `applicationOne` is written in Vue and contains all the UI/Logic to create a user. `application2` is written in React and needs to create a user. Using a single-spa parcel allows you to wrap your `app1` Vue component
in a way that will make it work inside `application2` despite the different frameworks. Even better if `application2` is unmounted by single-spa (per the activity function returning false)
Think of parcels as a single-spa specific implementation of webcomponents.

## Utility modules share business logic
Utility modules are a great place to share business logic. Instead of each application creating their own implementation of something tied to your buisness logic, you can use a plain javascript object (single-spa utility) to share that logic.
For example: Authorization. How does each application know which user is logged in? You could have each application ask the server or read a JWT but that creates duplicate work in each application.

> Instead implmenting logic around who is logged in one module (with all the necessary methods exported on the module) and each application can simply ask the utility module who is logged in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of implementing logic around who is logged in one module (with all the necessary methods exported on the module) and each application can simply ask the utility module who is logged in.
```
